- **Büyüktanır, Tolga; Aktaş, Mehmet S**. *On the Use of Embedding Techniques for Modeling User Navigational Behavior in Intelligent Prefetching Strategies*. *Journal Concurrency and Computations Practice and Experience*, 2024. [Paper](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/15320634) [Code](https://github.com/tolgabuyuktanir/CrowbarDemoApp) [Demo](http://127.0.0.1:7860/)

    **Abstract:** In today's data-intensive client-server systems, traditional caching methods often fail to meet the demands of modern applications, especially in mobile environments with unstable network conditions. This research addresses the challenge of improving data delivery by proposing an advanced prefetching framework that utilizes various embedding techniques. We explore how to model user navigation using graph-based, autoencoder-based, and sequence-to-sequence-based embedding methods and assess their impact on prefetching accuracy and efficiency. Our study shows that utilizing these embedding techniques with supervised learning models improves prefetching performance. We also present a software architecture that blends supervised and unsupervised learning approaches, along with user-specific and collective learning models, to create a robust prefetching mechanism. The contributions of this study include developing a scalable prefetching solution using machine learning/deep learning algorithms and providing an open-source prototype of the proposed architecture. This paper offers a significant improvement over previous research and provides valuable insights for enhancing the performance of data-intensive applications.

- **Büyüktanır, Tolga; Aktaş, Mehmet S**. *Predictive Prefetching in Client-Server Systems: A Navigational Behavior Modeling Approach*. *International Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering*, 2024. [Paper](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/10.1142/S0218194024500384) [Code](https://github.com/tolgabuyuktanir/CrowbarDemoApp) [Demo](http://127.0.0.1:7860/)

   **Abstract:** Predictive prefetching in client-server systems improves data retrieval efficiency by anticipating user behavior. This study explores navigational behavior modeling using advanced embedding techniques such as word embedding, Node2Vec, and seq2seq models. The models are trained with sequential user activity data, creating 64-dimensional vectors for each activity, averaged to form machine learning inputs. Evaluations of various classical ML methods highlight the efficacy of the approach in reducing latency and enhancing user experience by prefetching required data proactively.

- **Büyüktanır, Tolga; Sigirci, I Onur; Aktaş, Mehmet S**. *Enhancing Accessibility to Data in Data-Intensive Web Applications by Using Intelligent Web Prefetching Methodologies*. *International Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering*, Vol. 33, No. 09, 2023, pp. 1405–1438. [Paper](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S0218194023500365) [Code](https://github.com/tolgabuyuktanir/CrowbarDemoApp) [Demo](http://127.0.0.1:7860/)

    **Abstract:** Data-intensive Web Applications built using client–server architectures usually provide prefetching mechanisms to enhance data accessibility. Prefetching is a strategy of retrieving data before it is requested so that it can be ready when the user requests it. Prefetching reduces the load on the web server by making data available before the user requests it. Prefetching can be used for static content, such as images and web pages, as well as dynamic content, such as search results. Prefetching can also be used to improve the performance of web applications, as the data is available quickly. There are several scheduling methods, such as time-based scheduling, event-based scheduling and priority-based scheduling, for prefetching to ensure that essential data is always ready when the user requests it. In this study, we focus on time-based scheduling for prefetching. We introduce time-based scheduling methodologies using sequential pattern mining techniques and long-term short memory-based deep learning strategies. To show the usefulness of these strategies, we develop a prototype application. We conduct an extensive experimental study to evaluate the performance of the proposed time-based scheduling methodologies using both performance and accuracy metrics. Based on the computed metrics, using proposed prefetching methods provided a promising cache hit rate when using the optimal cache size. The results show that the proposed prefetching methodologies are useful in data-intensive web applications for enhancing data accessibility. Work remains to investigate the use of attention-based sequence-to-sequence models in the web prefetching domain.

- **Büyüktanır, Tolga; Aktaş, Mehmet S**. *A Deep Learning-Based Prefetching Approach to Enable Scalability for Data-Intensive Applications*. 2022 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2022, pp. 2716–2721. [Paper](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10020591) [Code](https://github.com/tolgabuyuktanir/CrowbarDemoApp) [Demo](http://127.0.0.1:7860/)

    **Abstract:** Fast data delivery to users is a big challenge in client-server architecture-based data-intensive systems. Here, prefetching is a widely used technique to increase data-intensive mobile or web applications’ operational performance and data delivery speed. This study proposes a methodology that can address this challenge using deep-learning-enabled prefetching approaches. The proposed methodology minimizes the data-access latency by adopting an approach that models the customer navigational browsing data and predicts the following user actions. The proposed approach utilizes two different recurrent neural network methods to model the clickstream data. These methods include LSTM and bi-directional LSTM. To show the usability of the proposed methodology, we provide a prototype implementation. To this end, we use a public dataset obtained from log files of a coffee store mobile application. In the prototype implementation, because the small number of users accounted for the majority of the load on the system, we segmented users as active and cold users. To facilitate testing of the prototype implementation, we conducted an experimental study. Here, we investigated whether the system can predict users’ near-future requests. In the experimental study, we record the cache hit rates. The results show that the proposed prefetching is promising and can be utilized in client-server-based data-intensive applications.

- **Büyüktanır, Tolga; Aktaş, Mehmet S**. *Mobile Prefetching and Web Prefetching: A Systematic Literature Review*. *International Conference on Computational Science and Its Applications*, Springer, Cham, 2022, pp. 75–89. [Paper](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-10545-6_6) [Code](https://github.com/tolgabuyuktanir/CrowbarDemoApp) [Demo](http://127.0.0.1:7860/)

    **Abstract:** Today, we see that prefetching systems are widely used to decrease the network traffic, data access latency, energy consumption, and computing performance inefficiency of data-intensive operations. However, prefetching is a concept used in different computing and IT fields such as microprocessor design, micro-controller design, hard disk design, database, network, web application, mobile application, etc. The fact that the concept of prefetching is used in different fields causes difficulties in literature review and research. Therefore, these studies need to be organized systematically for each field. This study presents a systematic literature review of prefetching related mobile and web applications to identify research gaps, define new study subject opportunities, and present future directions. We think that this study will make it easier for other researchers to work in this field with the research gaps and opportunities indicated.

